dss-cookbook/src/main/asciidoc/_chapters/eIDAS.adoc, before:

:sectnums:
:sectnumlevels: 5
:sourcetestdir: ../../../test/java
:samplesdir: ../_samples
:imagesdir: ../images/

== eIDAS

=== Overview of certificates

==== Qualified status of certificate

The qualification status determination is based on ETSI TS 119 615 standard (cf. <<R14>>), that requires extraction of information from a certificate (i.e. QcStatements, see <<R28>>) and from a Trusted List (under TSPService corresponding to the certificate).

For more information about how to verify a certificate qualification status using DSS, please see the section <<CertificateValidation>>.

==== Type of certificate

A certificate can be for electronic signature, for electronic seal or for website authentication.

A qualified certificate shall comply with the eIDAS regulation <<R12>>, for each type:

 * *Qualified certificate for electronic signature* - shall comply with Annex I "REQUIREMENTS FOR QUALIFIED CERTIFICATES FOR ELECTRONIC SIGNATURES" of eIDAS Regulation;
* *Qualified certificate for electronic seals* - shall comply with Annex III "REQUIREMENTS FOR QUALIFIED CERTIFICATES FOR ELECTRONIC SEALS" of eIDAS Regulation;
* *Qualified certificate for web authentication* - shall comply with Annex IV "REQUIREMENTS FOR QUALIFIED CERTIFICATES FOR WEBSITE AUTHENTICATION" of eIDAS Regulation;

The certificate type determination is based on ETSI TS 119 615 standard (cf. <<R14>>). The validation process takes into account the following factors but not limited to:

 * The certificate type defined in QcStatements (see <<R28>>). One of the following values is supported:
    ** `qc-type-esign` (OID "0.4.0.1862.1.6.1") - identifies a certificate for a electronic signature;
    ** `qc-type-eseal` (OID "0.4.0.1862.1.6.2") - identifies a certificate for a electronic seal;
    ** `qc-type-web` (OID "0.4.0.1862.1.6.3") - identifies a certificate for a web authentication.
 * Information extracted from a TSP Service issued the certificate (from a Trusted List). The type of certificate may be 'overruled' based on the defined Qualifiers.

For more information about the validation process please see the ETSI TS 119 615 standard (cf. <<R14>>).

=== How certificate type and qualification are represented in DSS
[[CertificateQualificationDetermination]]
==== Certificate Qualification determination

In order to determine a type and qualification of certificate, the `CertificateVerifier` can be used, provided the relevant information extracted from a Trusted List(s).

An example of a qualification data extraction for a certificate, can be found below:

[source,java,indent=0]
.Certificate qualification validation
----
include::{sourcetestdir}/eu/europa/esig/dss/cookbook/example/validate/CertificateQualificationTest.java[tags=demo]
----

==== Qualified certificate for WebSite Authentication (QWAC)

With DSS, it is possible to validate a SSL certificate against the EUMS TL and the ETSI TS 119 615 (cf. <<R14>>) to determine if it is a Qualified certificate for WebSite Authentication (QWAC).

DSS provides a special class `SSLCertificateLoader` allowing to extract the SSL certificate chain from the given URL. The qualification verification is similar to the example defined in chapter <<CertificateQualificationDetermination>>.

[source,java,indent=0]
.Validate an SSL certificate and retrieve its qualification level
----
include::{sourcetestdir}/eu/europa/esig/dss/cookbook/example/validate/QWACValidationTest.java[tags=demo]
----

=== Overview of AdES signatures

==== Type of AdES

eIDAS Regulation (cf. <<R12>>) defines the following types of an electronic signature:

* (simple) *electronic signature* - data in electronic form which is attached to or logically associated with other data in electronic form and which is used by the signatory to sign;
* *advanced electronic signature* - an electronic signature which meets the requirements set out in Article 26 of eIDAS Regulation <<R12>>;
* *qualified electronic signature* - an advanced electronic signature that is created by a qualified electronic signature creation device, and which is based on a qualified certificate for electronic signatures.

==== Qualified status of AdES signature

To have a qualified status an electronic signature/seal shall satisfy the following requirements but not limited to:

 * the signing-certificate shall be qualified at the certificate's issuance time;
 * the signing-certificate shall be qualified at the best-signature-time;
 * the signing-certificate shall have a type of for eSignature or for eSeal, respectively to the signature type;
 * the signature shall be created using Qualified Signature Creation Device (QSCD).

=== How signature type and qualification are represented in DSS
[[SignatureQualificationDetermination]]
==== Signature Qualification determination

In order to determine a type and qualification of a signature, an instance of `SignedDocumentValidator` can be used, provided the relevant information is extracted from a Trusted List(s).

An example of a qualification data extraction for a signature, can be found below:

[source,java,indent=0]
.Signature qualification validation
----
include::{sourcetestdir}/eu/europa/esig/dss/cookbook/example/validate/SignatureQualificationTest.java[tags=demo]
----

=== Verifying the qualified status of timestamp

ETSI TS 119 615 (<<R14>>) specifies standardized procedures for the determination of the qualification of a timestamp.
DSS is able to determine a qualification level of a timestamp if a relative information about TrustServiceProviders is provided to a certificate verifier (loaded automatically to a trusted certificate source with <<tlValidationJob>>).

Three qualification levels are supported by DSS and can be obtained :

* `QTSA` (issued from a granted trust service with TSA/QTST type at the timestamp production time);
* `TSA` any other from a known trust anchor;
* `N/A` for others.

In order to determine a type and qualification of signature, an instance of `DetachedTimestampValidator` can be used for a detached CMS time-stamp verification, provided the relevant information extracted from a Trusted List(s).

NOTE: For standalone time-stamps within different containers (e.g. PDF or ASiC) a corresponding instance of a `TimestampValidator` shall be used.

The following example verifies the qualification level of a timestamp:

[source,java,indent=0]
.Validate a timestamp and retrieve its qualification level
----
include::{sourcetestdir}/eu/europa/esig/dss/cookbook/example/validate/TimestampValidationTest.java[tags=demo]
----

Commit message:

DSS-3735 : add documentation for QWACValidator

dss-cookbook/src/main/asciidoc/_chapters/eIDAS.adoc, after:

:sectnums:
:sectnumlevels: 5
:sourcetestdir: ../../../test/java
:samplesdir: ../_samples
:imagesdir: ../images/

== eIDAS

=== Overview of certificates

==== Qualified status of certificate

The qualification status determination is based on ETSI TS 119 615 standard (cf. <<R14>>), that requires extraction of information from a certificate (i.e. QcStatements, see <<R28>>) and from a Trusted List (under TSPService corresponding to the certificate).

For more information about how to verify a certificate qualification status using DSS, please see the section <<CertificateValidation>>.

==== Type of certificate

A certificate can be for electronic signature, for electronic seal or for website authentication.

A qualified certificate shall comply with the eIDAS regulation <<R12>>, for each type:

 * *Qualified certificate for electronic signature* - shall comply with Annex I "REQUIREMENTS FOR QUALIFIED CERTIFICATES FOR ELECTRONIC SIGNATURES" of eIDAS Regulation;
* *Qualified certificate for electronic seals* - shall comply with Annex III "REQUIREMENTS FOR QUALIFIED CERTIFICATES FOR ELECTRONIC SEALS" of eIDAS Regulation;
* *Qualified certificate for web authentication* - shall comply with Annex IV "REQUIREMENTS FOR QUALIFIED CERTIFICATES FOR WEBSITE AUTHENTICATION" of eIDAS Regulation;

The certificate type determination is based on ETSI TS 119 615 standard (cf. <<R14>>). The validation process takes into account the following factors but not limited to:

 * The certificate type defined in QcStatements (see <<R28>>). One of the following values is supported:
    ** `qc-type-esign` (OID "0.4.0.1862.1.6.1") - identifies a certificate for a electronic signature;
    ** `qc-type-eseal` (OID "0.4.0.1862.1.6.2") - identifies a certificate for a electronic seal;
    ** `qc-type-web` (OID "0.4.0.1862.1.6.3") - identifies a certificate for a web authentication.
 * Information extracted from a TSP Service issued the certificate (from a Trusted List). The type of certificate may be 'overruled' based on the defined Qualifiers.

For more information about the validation process please see the ETSI TS 119 615 standard (cf. <<R14>>).

=== How certificate type and qualification are represented in DSS
[[CertificateQualificationDetermination]]
==== Certificate Qualification determination

In order to determine a type and qualification of certificate, the `CertificateVerifier` can be used, provided the relevant information extracted from a Trusted List(s).

An example of a qualification data extraction for a certificate, can be found below:

[source,java,indent=0]
.Certificate qualification validation
----
include::{sourcetestdir}/eu/europa/esig/dss/cookbook/example/validate/CertificateQualificationTest.java[tags=demo]
----

[[QWACValidation]]
==== Qualified certificate for WebSite Authentication (QWAC)

Since version `6.4` DSS provides a support of the ETSI TS 119 411-5 <<R32>> standard, allowing validation of qualified certificates for website authentication (QWAC) as in amended Regulation 910/2014 <<R12>>.

DSS supports validation of the following profiles, according to the standard:

* 1-QWAC;
* 2-QWAC.

For validation, a website URL should be provided to the `QWACValidator` class in order to establish whether the secure connection is supported by a QWAC.

[source,java,indent=0]
.Validate a TLS/SSL certificate and retrieve its qualification status
----
include::{sourcetestdir}/eu/europa/esig/dss/cookbook/example/validate/QWACValidationTest.java[tags=demo]
----

For configuration of the validation constraints related to a TLS certificate and/or TLS Certificate Binding signature, please see <<validationPolicy>>. For validation of TLS certificates, the constraints provided within the `<SignatureConstraints>/<BasicSignatureConstraints>/<SigningCertificate>` element apply.

NOTE: The configuration of the validation checks applies exclusively to basic X.509 certificate or signature validation processes. The qualification checks enforced in the ETSI TS 119 615 <<R14>> and/or ETSI TS 119 411-5 <<R32>> are not configurable.

It is also possible to validate a particular certificate as a TLS/SSL certificate "candidate" against a website URL, without requesting the actual TLS/SSL certificates from a URL connection, as shown in the example below:

[source,java,indent=0]
.Offline validation of TLS/SSL certificate
----
include::{sourcetestdir}/eu/europa/esig/dss/cookbook/example/validate/QWACValidationTest.java[tags=demo-offline]
----

NOTE: The aforementioned method may not work "out of the box" for 2-QWAC profile validation, that requires extraction of HTTP response headers and access to a TLS Certificate Binding signature. For validation of this profile with a provided certificate an additional configuration may be required, which is out of scope of this documentation.

=== Overview of AdES signatures

==== Type of AdES

eIDAS Regulation (cf. <<R12>>) defines the following types of an electronic signature:

* (simple) *electronic signature* - data in electronic form which is attached to or logically associated with other data in electronic form and which is used by the signatory to sign;
* *advanced electronic signature* - an electronic signature which meets the requirements set out in Article 26 of eIDAS Regulation <<R12>>;
* *qualified electronic signature* - an advanced electronic signature that is created by a qualified electronic signature creation device, and which is based on a qualified certificate for electronic signatures.

==== Qualified status of AdES signature

To have a qualified status an electronic signature/seal shall satisfy the following requirements but not limited to:

 * the signing-certificate shall be qualified at the certificate's issuance time;
 * the signing-certificate shall be qualified at the best-signature-time;
 * the signing-certificate shall have a type of for eSignature or for eSeal, respectively to the signature type;
 * the signature shall be created using Qualified Signature Creation Device (QSCD).

=== How signature type and qualification are represented in DSS
[[SignatureQualificationDetermination]]
==== Signature Qualification determination

In order to determine a type and qualification of a signature, an instance of `SignedDocumentValidator` can be used, provided the relevant information is extracted from a Trusted List(s).

An example of a qualification data extraction for a signature, can be found below:

[source,java,indent=0]
.Signature qualification validation
----
include::{sourcetestdir}/eu/europa/esig/dss/cookbook/example/validate/SignatureQualificationTest.java[tags=demo]
----

=== Verifying the qualified status of timestamp

ETSI TS 119 615 (<<R14>>) specifies standardized procedures for the determination of the qualification of a timestamp.
DSS is able to determine a qualification level of a timestamp if a relative information about TrustServiceProviders is provided to a certificate verifier (loaded automatically to a trusted certificate source with <<tlValidationJob>>).

Three qualification levels are supported by DSS and can be obtained :

* `QTSA` (issued from a granted trust service with TSA/QTST type at the timestamp production time);
* `TSA` any other from a known trust anchor;
* `N/A` for others.

In order to determine a type and qualification of signature, an instance of `DetachedTimestampValidator` can be used for a detached CMS time-stamp verification, provided the relevant information extracted from a Trusted List(s).

NOTE: For standalone time-stamps within different containers (e.g. PDF or ASiC) a corresponding instance of a `TimestampValidator` shall be used.

The following example verifies the qualification level of a timestamp:

[source,java,indent=0]
.Validate a timestamp and retrieve its qualification level
----
include::{sourcetestdir}/eu/europa/esig/dss/cookbook/example/validate/TimestampValidationTest.java[tags=demo]
----
