dss-cookbook/src/main/asciidoc/_chapters/revocation-data-management.adoc, before:

:sectnums:
:sectnumlevels: 5
:sourcetestdir: ../../../test/java
:samplesdir: ../_samples
:imagesdir: ../images/

[[RevocationDataManagement]]
== Revocation data management
Revocation data management is an essential part in the lifecycle of a digital certificate and thus of a digital signature too.

=== Tokens and sources

DSS provides utilities for processing and validation of both CRL and OCSP tokens, containing a revocation information about a certificate (see <<CRLsAndOCSP>> for more information on CRLs and OCSP)

For every certificate, the validity has to be checked via CRL or OCSP responses. The information may originate from different CRL or OCSP sources.
For easing the usage of such sources, DSS implements a `CRLSource` and `OCSPSource` interfaces (which inherit from `RevocationSource`), which offer a generic and uniform way of accessing CRL and OCSP sources, respectively. Furthermore, a caching mechanism can be easily attached to those sources, optimizing the access time to revocation information by reducing network connections to online servers.

The interface `CRLSource` defines the method which returns a `CRLToken` for the given certificate/issuer certificate couple:

[source,java,indent=0]
.CRLSource usage
----
include::{sourcetestdir}/eu/europa/esig/dss/cookbook/example/snippets/CRLSourceSnippet.java[tags=demo]
----

The interface `OCSPSource` defines the method which returns `OCSPToken` for the given certificate/issuer certificate couple:

[source,java,indent=0]
.OCSPSource usage
----
include::{sourcetestdir}/eu/europa/esig/dss/cookbook/example/snippets/OCSPSourceSnippet.java[tags=demo]
----

We use these classes during the certificate validation process through `validationContext` object (based on `ValidationContext` class) which is a "cache" for a validation request that contains every object required for a complete validation process. This object in turn instantiates a `RevocationDataVerifier` used by `RevocationDataLoadingStrategy` class whose role is to fetch revocation data by querying an OCSP or CRL source in the defined order and return the succeeded result (see <<RevocationLoadingStrategy>> for more details).

In general, we can distinguish three main sources:

* Offline sources (`OfflineRevocationSource`);
* Online sources (`OnlineRevocationSource`);
* Sources with the cache mechanism.

As well as a list of sources (`ListRevocationSource`) with a collection of several sources.

=== Caching

DSS provides caching mechanisms for CRL and OCSP responses to improve performance by reducing network calls to online revocation sources. Two types of caching implementations are available:

* **JDBC-based caching**: Stores revocation data in a database
* **File-based caching**: Stores revocation data in the local file system

Both implementations extend the `RepositoryRevocationSource` class and allow the implementer to define a backup revocation source for cases when cached data is not available.

==== JDBC-based caching

The JDBC-based implementation allows caching of CRL and OCSP responses to a database. The class contains a complete set of functions to save revocation data to a database, extract, update and remove it.

List of JDBC cached Revocation sources implemented in DSS:

* `JdbcRevocationSource`
** `JdbcCacheCRLSource`
** `JdbcCacheOCSPSource`

WARNING: A database table shall be initialized before you start working with the cached revocation repository.

===== CRL
An example for JdbcCacheCRLSource :

[source,java,indent=0]
.JdbcCacheCRLSource usage
----
include::{sourcetestdir}/eu/europa/esig/dss/cookbook/example/snippets/CRLSourceSnippet.java[tags=demo-cached]
----

===== OCSP
An example for JdbcCacheOCSPSource :

[source,java,indent=0]
.JdbcCacheOCSPSource usage
----
include::{sourcetestdir}/eu/europa/esig/dss/cookbook/example/snippets/OCSPSourceSnippet.java[tags=demo-cached]
----

===== JDBC sources with other databases

Depending on a used database, the executed SQL requests may differ (for example one or another datatype may be not supported).
In order to adapt the `JdbcRevocationSource` to the used database, the easiest way is to override the SQL requests with values supported by the target database.

For instance, in PostgreSQL a `bytea` datatype is required for storing binary data instead of `blob` or `longvarbinary` used in default implementation of Jdbc sources. The following example demonstrates a Jdbc implementation example for CRL data storing adapted for PostgreSQL:

[source,java,indent=0]
.JdbcCacheCRLSource with PostgreSQL
----
include::{sourcetestdir}/eu/europa/esig/dss/cookbook/example/snippets/CRLSourceSnippet.java[tags=demo-postgresql]
----

==== File-based caching

The file-based implementation provides an alternative caching mechanism that stores revocation data directly on the local file system. This approach is particularly useful in environments where database access is not available or when simpler deployment is desired.

List of File-based cached Revocation sources implemented in DSS:

* `FileRevocationSource`
** `FileCacheCRLSource`
** `FileCacheOCSPSource`

The file-based cache stores each revocation response as a separate file in a designated cache directory, using a normalized URL-based filename with the appropriate extension (`.crl` for CRL files, `.ocsp` for OCSP responses).

WARNING: Ensure that the cache directory has appropriate read/write permissions for the application. The file-based cache will automatically handle file creation and cleanup operations.

===== CRL
An example for FileCacheCRLSource :

[source,java,indent=0]
.FileCacheCRLSource usage
----
include::{sourcetestdir}/eu/europa/esig/dss/cookbook/example/snippets/CRLSourceSnippet.java[tags=demo-file-cached]
----

===== OCSP
An example for FileCacheOCSPSource :

[source,java,indent=0]
.FileCacheOCSPSource usage
----
include::{sourcetestdir}/eu/europa/esig/dss/cookbook/example/snippets/OCSPSourceSnippet.java[tags=demo-file-cached]
----

=== Online fetching

DSS provides utilities for online fetching of revocation data from remote sources, during the signature augmentation and validation processes.

WARNING: By default, revocation data are not fetched from untrusted sources. In other words, revocation data are not fetched when the prospective certificate chain does not contain a trust anchor.

==== CRL
This is a representation of an Online CRL repository. This implementation will download the CRL using the protocol referenced in the certificate (e.g. HTTP, LDAP). The URIs of CRL server will be extracted from this property (OID value: 1.3.6.1.5.5.7.48.1.3).

It allows the following configuration :

[source,java,indent=0]
.OnlineCRLSource usage
----
include::{sourcetestdir}/eu/europa/esig/dss/cookbook/example/snippets/CRLSourceSnippet.java[tags=demo-online]
----

==== OCSP
This is a representation of an Online OCSP repository. This implementation will access the OCSP responder using the access point defined in the certificate. Note that the certificate's Authority Information Access (AIA) extension is used to find issuer's resources location like Online Certificate Status Protocol (OCSP). The URIs of OCSP server will be extracted from this property (OID value: 1.3.6.1.5.5.7.48.1).

It allows the following configuration :

[source,java,indent=0]
.OnlineOCSPSource usage
----
include::{sourcetestdir}/eu/europa/esig/dss/cookbook/example/snippets/OCSPSourceSnippet.java[tags=demo-online]
----

=== Other implementations of CRL and OCSP Sources

Other revocation sources find the status of a certificate either from a list stored locally or using the information contained in the advanced signature or online way. Here is the list of sources already implemented in the DSS framework:

* CRL sources:
** `OfflineCRLSource` : This class implements the `OfflineRevocationSource` and retrieves the revocation data from extracted information. The code is common for all signature formats and CRL contents are injected by its sub-classes:
*** `CMSCRLSource` : Extracts CRLs and CRL references from a CMS Signed Data:
**** `CAdESCRLSource` : Sub-class of `CMSCRLSource` for a CAdES Signature;
**** `TimestampCRLSource`: Sub-class of `CMSCRLSource` for a Timestamp token (RFC 3161);
*** `PAdESCRLSource` : Extracts CRLs and CRL references from a PAdES signature.
*** `XAdESCRLSource` : Extracts CRLs and CRL references from a XAdES signature.
*** `ExternalResourcesCRLSource` : A class that can instantiate a list of certificate revocation lists from a directory where the individual lists should be.
** `OnlineCRLSource` : Retrieves CRL files from online sources with the CRL Distribution Points information from the certificate.
** `JdbcCacheCrlSource` : Implementation of the `JdbcRevocationSource`. This implementation allows storage of valid CRL entries to a defined `DataSource'` and retrieve them locally.
** `FileCacheCRLSource` : Implementation of the `FileRevocationSource`. This implementation allows storage of valid CRL entries to the local file system and retrieve them locally.

* OCSP sources:
** `OfflineOCSPSource` : This class implements the `OfflineRevocationSource` and retrieves the revocation data from extracted information. The code is common for all signature formats and OCSP responses are injected by its sub-classes:
*** `CMSOCSPSource` : Extracts OCSP responses and OCSP references from a CMS Signed Data:
**** `CAdESOCSPSource` : Sub-class of `CMSOCSPSource` for a CAdES Signature;
**** `TimestampOCSPSource`: Sub-class of `CMSOCSPSource` for a Timestamp token (RFC 3161);
*** `PAdESOCSPSource` : Extracts OCSP responses and OCSP references from a PAdES signature.
*** `XAdESOCSPSource` : Extracts OCSP responses and OCSP references from a XAdES signature.
**** `ExternalResourcesOCSPSource` : A class that can instantiate a list of OCSPToken from a directory where should be the individual DER Encoded X509 certificates files.
** `OnlineOCSPSource` : Retrieves OCSP responses from online source.
** `JdbcCacheOcspSource` : Implementation of the `JdbcRevocationSource`. This implementation allows storage of valid OCSP entries to a defined `DataSource` and retrieve them locally.
** `FileCacheOCSPSource` : Implementation of the `FileRevocationSource`. This implementation allows storage of valid OCSP entries to the local file system and retrieve them locally.

[[RevocationLoadingStrategy]]
=== Revocation data loading strategy

Since version `5.9`, DSS allows the use of a `RevocationDataLoadingStrategy`. The latter defines logic for loading OCSP or CRL data. Two strategies are available in the core package of DSS:

* `OCSPFirstRevocationDataLoadingStrategy`: loads OCSP first, if not available or the response is invalid, then tries to load CRL and returns the first succeeded result. This strategy is used by default for revocation retrieving.
* `CRLFirstRevocationDataLoadingStrategy`: fetches firstly CRL response, if not available, tries OCSP and returns the first succeeded result.

NOTE: Since DSS `5.11` in order to avoid concurrency issues, the `RevocationDataLoadingStrategy` shall be configured within a `CertificateVerifier` using the new `RevocationDataLoadingStrategyFactory` class.

See section <<certificateVerifier>> for an example of how to customize a used `RevocationDataLoadingStrategy` with a builder.

Using an OCSP first (i.e. `OCSPFirstRevocationDataLoadingStrategy`) has some advantages:

. There is a potential benefit of freshness compared to using CRLs: in case the OCSP sends queries to a database that is updated in real time or every `x` hours, the information fetched by the OCSP is more recent (`thisUpdate` field) than the information contained in the CRL, given that the CRL is built from that database. In the worst case, the OCSP uses the data contained in the CRL and they both have the same thisUpdate field. The information fetched by an OCSP will never be older than the one obtained from a CRL.
. The certificate that signed the OCSP response might contain an `OCSPNoCheck` extension. This extension indicates that the revocation data of the certificate that contains the public key linked to the private key that was used to sign the OCSP response does not need to be checked.
. Getting a response takes less time and less memory space for OCSP than with CRLs. A CRL can take a lot of space and a long time to be downloaded due its big size. There is also no obligation to sort CRLs according to serial number which means that the whole list needs to be browsed until finding the searched serial number.

[[RevocationFallback]]
==== Revocation fallback

Since version `5.11`, DSS performs a validation of revocation data obtained from online sources (on signature extension and validation included) through <<RevocationDataVerifier>>. Revocation data loading strategy runs the revocation verification process for each obtained revocation token (i.e. OCSP or CRL) until receiving the first successful result. In case none of the fetched revocation tokens are good to continue the validation process (i.e. verification has failed), then the strategy decides whether any results must be returned based on the "revocation fallback" property. The revocation fallback has two possible values:

 * `FALSE` (by default) - does not return any revocation token in case none of the obtained revocation tokens have passed the verification process; and
 * `TRUE` - returns the first obtained revocation token when verification of all tokens has failed.

NOTE: While the revocation fallback is set to `FALSE` by default, it is enforced to `TRUE` value within a `SignedDocumentValidator` class for performing a signature validation, in order to produce a complete validation report. Therefore, the change of the value within `CertificateVerifier` will only impact the signature extension process.

To configure the revocation fallback behavior, the property should be configured within `CertificateVerifier`, see section <<certificateVerifier>> for an example.

[[RevocationDataVerifier]]
=== Revocation data verifier

Since version `5.11`, DSS provides a way to configure a revocation data checking algorithm within `SignatureValidationContext` in order to define whether the available revocation data is good and sufficient and if a new revocation data should be loaded, as well as the acceptance of a freshly fetched revocation data itself.

`RevocationDataVerifier` must be provided within the used `CertificateVerifier` in order to configure the revocation data checking behaviour. See section <<certificateVerifier>> for an example of how to provide a custom `RevocationDataVerifier` to a `CertificateVerifier`.

WARNING: An instance of `RevocationDataVerifier` should not be shared between multiple `CertificateVerifier` instances, as it re-uses the same trusted certificate stores defined within a `CertificateVerifier`.

An example of `RevocationDataVerifier` please see below:

[source,java,indent=0]
.RevocationDataVerifier usage
----
include::{sourcetestdir}/eu/europa/esig/dss/cookbook/example/snippets/CertificateVerifierSnippet.java[tags=rev-data-verifier]
----

[[TimestampTokenVerifier]]
=== Timestamp token verifier

Since version `6.1`, DSS provides a way to configure the process for accepting of embedded timestamps in order to extract the corresponding POEs during the validation process.

`TimestampTokenVerifier` must be provided within the used `CertificateVerifier` in order to configure the revocation data checking behaviour. See section <<certificateVerifier>> for an example of how to provide a custom `TimestampTokenVerifier` to a `CertificateVerifier`.

An example of `TimestampTokenVerifier` configuration please see below:

[source,java,indent=0]
.TimestampTokenVerifier usage
----
include::{sourcetestdir}/eu/europa/esig/dss/cookbook/example/snippets/CertificateVerifierSnippet.java[tags=tst-token-verifier]
----

Commit message:

DSS-3665 : improve documentation and javadoc
(cherry picked from commit 1ec3bab00c3fa8f6e4ec1060eb0c0f5336ed6b38)

dss-cookbook/src/main/asciidoc/_chapters/revocation-data-management.adoc, after:

:sectnums:
:sectnumlevels: 5
:sourcetestdir: ../../../test/java
:samplesdir: ../_samples
:imagesdir: ../images/

[[RevocationDataManagement]]
== Revocation data management
Revocation data management is an essential part in the lifecycle of a digital certificate and thus of a digital signature too.

=== Tokens and sources

DSS provides utilities for processing and validation of both CRL and OCSP tokens, containing a revocation information about a certificate (see <<CRLsAndOCSP>> for more information on CRLs and OCSP)

For every certificate, the validity has to be checked via CRL or OCSP responses. The information may originate from different CRL or OCSP sources.
For easing the usage of such sources, DSS implements a `CRLSource` and `OCSPSource` interfaces (which inherit from `RevocationSource`), which offer a generic and uniform way of accessing CRL and OCSP sources, respectively. Furthermore, a caching mechanism can be easily attached to those sources, optimizing the access time to revocation information by reducing network connections to online servers.

The interface `CRLSource` defines the method which returns a `CRLToken` for the given certificate/issuer certificate couple:

[source,java,indent=0]
.CRLSource usage
----
include::{sourcetestdir}/eu/europa/esig/dss/cookbook/example/snippets/CRLSourceSnippet.java[tags=demo]
----

The interface `OCSPSource` defines the method which returns `OCSPToken` for the given certificate/issuer certificate couple:

[source,java,indent=0]
.OCSPSource usage
----
include::{sourcetestdir}/eu/europa/esig/dss/cookbook/example/snippets/OCSPSourceSnippet.java[tags=demo]
----

We use these classes during the certificate validation process through `validationContext` object (based on `ValidationContext` class) which is a "cache" for a validation request that contains every object required for a complete validation process. This object in turn instantiates a `RevocationDataVerifier` used by `RevocationDataLoadingStrategy` class whose role is to fetch revocation data by querying an OCSP or CRL source in the defined order and return the succeeded result (see <<RevocationLoadingStrategy>> for more details).

In general, we can distinguish three main sources:

* Offline sources (`OfflineRevocationSource`);
* Online sources (`OnlineRevocationSource`);
* Sources with the cache mechanism.

As well as a list of sources (`ListRevocationSource`) with a collection of several sources.

=== Caching

DSS provides caching mechanisms for CRL and OCSP responses to improve performance by reducing network calls to online revocation sources. Two types of caching implementations are available:

* **JDBC-based caching**: Stores revocation data in a database
* **File-based caching**: Stores revocation data in the local file system

Both implementations extend the `RepositoryRevocationSource` class and allow the implementer to define a backup revocation source for cases when cached data is not available.

The classes provide logic for revocation data management based on the `NextUpdate` field, such as retrieving fresh enough revocation data from the cache, but updating revocation data with a backup revocation source when no fresh revocation data is available in cache (e.g. when the `NextUpdate` datetime of the cached revocation data has been reached).

==== JDBC-based caching

The JDBC-based implementation allows caching of CRL and OCSP responses to a database. The class contains a complete set of functions to save revocation data to a database, extract, update and remove it.

List of JDBC cached Revocation sources implemented in DSS:

* `JdbcRevocationSource` - an abstract class containing a logic for processing the revocation data cache within the JDBC;
** `JdbcCacheCRLSource` - class for CRL handling using the JDBC cache;
** `JdbcCacheOCSPSource` - class for OCSP handling using the JDBC cache.

WARNING: A database table shall be initialized before you start working with the cached revocation repository.

===== CRL

The `JdbcCacheCRLSource` is used for CRL tokens handling using the JDBC cache. Please see an example below:

[source,java,indent=0]
.JdbcCacheCRLSource usage
----
include::{sourcetestdir}/eu/europa/esig/dss/cookbook/example/snippets/CRLSourceSnippet.java[tags=demo-cached]
----

===== OCSP

The `JdbcCacheOCSPSource` is used for OCSP tokens handling using the JDBC cache. Please see an example below:

[source,java,indent=0]
.JdbcCacheOCSPSource usage
----
include::{sourcetestdir}/eu/europa/esig/dss/cookbook/example/snippets/OCSPSourceSnippet.java[tags=demo-cached]
----

===== JDBC sources with other databases

Depending on a used database, the executed SQL requests may differ (for example one or another datatype may be not supported).
In order to adapt the `JdbcRevocationSource` to the used database, the easiest way is to override the SQL requests with values supported by the target database.

For instance, in PostgreSQL a `bytea` datatype is required for storing binary data instead of `blob` or `longvarbinary` used in default implementation of Jdbc sources. The following example demonstrates a Jdbc implementation example for CRL data storing adapted for PostgreSQL:

[source,java,indent=0]
.JdbcCacheCRLSource with PostgreSQL
----
include::{sourcetestdir}/eu/europa/esig/dss/cookbook/example/snippets/CRLSourceSnippet.java[tags=demo-postgresql]
----

==== File-based caching

NOTE: The following classes are experimental and included starting from DSS version `6.3`. The classes were not extensively tested and may be modified in the future.

The file-based implementation provides an alternative caching mechanism that stores revocation data directly on the local file system. This approach is particularly useful in environments where database access is not available or when simpler deployment is desired.

List of File-based cached Revocation sources implemented in DSS:

* `FileRevocationSource` - an abstract class containing a logic for processing the revocation data cache within the filesystem;
** `FileCacheCRLSource` - class for CRL handling using the filesystem cache;
** `FileCacheOCSPSource` - class for OCSP handling using the filesystem cache.

The file-based cache stores each revocation response as a separate file in a designated cache directory, using a normalized URL-based filename with the appropriate extension (`.crl` for CRL files, `.ocsp` for OCSP responses).

WARNING: Ensure that the cache directory has appropriate read/write permissions for the application. The file-based cache will automatically handle file creation and cleanup operations.

===== CRL

The `FileCacheCRLSource` is used for CRL tokens handling using the filesystem cache. Please see an example below:

[source,java,indent=0]
.FileCacheCRLSource usage
----
include::{sourcetestdir}/eu/europa/esig/dss/cookbook/example/snippets/CRLSourceSnippet.java[tags=demo-file-cached]
----

===== OCSP

The `FileCacheOCSPSource` is used for OCSP tokens handling using the filesystem cache. Please see an example below:

[source,java,indent=0]
.FileCacheOCSPSource usage
----
include::{sourcetestdir}/eu/europa/esig/dss/cookbook/example/snippets/OCSPSourceSnippet.java[tags=demo-file-cached]
----

=== Online fetching

DSS provides utilities for online fetching of revocation data from remote sources, during the signature augmentation and validation processes.

WARNING: By default, revocation data are not fetched from untrusted sources. In other words, revocation data are not fetched when the prospective certificate chain does not contain a trust anchor.

==== CRL
This is a representation of an Online CRL repository. This implementation will download the CRL using the protocol referenced in the certificate (e.g. HTTP, LDAP). The URIs of CRL server will be extracted from this property (OID value: 1.3.6.1.5.5.7.48.1.3).

It allows the following configuration :

[source,java,indent=0]
.OnlineCRLSource usage
----
include::{sourcetestdir}/eu/europa/esig/dss/cookbook/example/snippets/CRLSourceSnippet.java[tags=demo-online]
----

==== OCSP
This is a representation of an Online OCSP repository. This implementation will access the OCSP responder using the access point defined in the certificate. Note that the certificate's Authority Information Access (AIA) extension is used to find issuer's resources location like Online Certificate Status Protocol (OCSP). The URIs of OCSP server will be extracted from this property (OID value: 1.3.6.1.5.5.7.48.1).

It allows the following configuration :

[source,java,indent=0]
.OnlineOCSPSource usage
----
include::{sourcetestdir}/eu/europa/esig/dss/cookbook/example/snippets/OCSPSourceSnippet.java[tags=demo-online]
----

=== Other implementations of CRL and OCSP Sources

Other revocation sources find the status of a certificate either from a list stored locally or using the information contained in the advanced signature or online way. Here is the list of sources already implemented in the DSS framework:

* CRL sources:
** `OfflineCRLSource` : This class implements the `OfflineRevocationSource` and retrieves the revocation data from extracted information. The code is common for all signature formats and CRL contents are injected by its sub-classes:
*** `CMSCRLSource` : Extracts CRLs and CRL references from a CMS Signed Data:
**** `CAdESCRLSource` : Sub-class of `CMSCRLSource` for a CAdES Signature;
**** `TimestampCRLSource`: Sub-class of `CMSCRLSource` for a Timestamp token (RFC 3161);
*** `PAdESCRLSource` : Extracts CRLs and CRL references from a PAdES signature.
*** `XAdESCRLSource` : Extracts CRLs and CRL references from a XAdES signature.
*** `ExternalResourcesCRLSource` : A class that can instantiate a list of certificate revocation lists from a directory where the individual lists should be.
** `OnlineCRLSource` : Retrieves CRL files from online sources with the CRL Distribution Points information from the certificate.
** `JdbcCacheCrlSource` : Implementation of the `JdbcRevocationSource`. This implementation allows storage of valid CRL entries to a defined `DataSource'` and retrieve them locally.
** `FileCacheCRLSource` : Implementation of the `FileRevocationSource`. This implementation allows storage of valid CRL entries to the local file system and retrieve them locally.

* OCSP sources:
** `OfflineOCSPSource` : This class implements the `OfflineRevocationSource` and retrieves the revocation data from extracted information. The code is common for all signature formats and OCSP responses are injected by its sub-classes:
*** `CMSOCSPSource` : Extracts OCSP responses and OCSP references from a CMS Signed Data:
**** `CAdESOCSPSource` : Sub-class of `CMSOCSPSource` for a CAdES Signature;
**** `TimestampOCSPSource`: Sub-class of `CMSOCSPSource` for a Timestamp token (RFC 3161);
*** `PAdESOCSPSource` : Extracts OCSP responses and OCSP references from a PAdES signature.
*** `XAdESOCSPSource` : Extracts OCSP responses and OCSP references from a XAdES signature.
**** `ExternalResourcesOCSPSource` : A class that can instantiate a list of OCSPToken from a directory where should be the individual DER Encoded X509 certificates files.
** `OnlineOCSPSource` : Retrieves OCSP responses from online source.
** `JdbcCacheOcspSource` : Implementation of the `JdbcRevocationSource`. This implementation allows storage of valid OCSP entries to a defined `DataSource` and retrieve them locally.
** `FileCacheOCSPSource` : Implementation of the `FileRevocationSource`. This implementation allows storage of valid OCSP entries to the local file system and retrieve them locally.

[[RevocationLoadingStrategy]]
=== Revocation data loading strategy

Since version `5.9`, DSS allows the use of a `RevocationDataLoadingStrategy`. The latter defines logic for loading OCSP or CRL data. Two strategies are available in the core package of DSS:

* `OCSPFirstRevocationDataLoadingStrategy`: loads OCSP first, if not available or the response is invalid, then tries to load CRL and returns the first succeeded result. This strategy is used by default for revocation retrieving.
* `CRLFirstRevocationDataLoadingStrategy`: fetches firstly CRL response, if not available, tries OCSP and returns the first succeeded result.

NOTE: Since DSS `5.11` in order to avoid concurrency issues, the `RevocationDataLoadingStrategy` shall be configured within a `CertificateVerifier` using the new `RevocationDataLoadingStrategyFactory` class.

See section <<certificateVerifier>> for an example of how to customize a used `RevocationDataLoadingStrategy` with a builder.

Using an OCSP first (i.e. `OCSPFirstRevocationDataLoadingStrategy`) has some advantages:

. There is a potential benefit of freshness compared to using CRLs: in case the OCSP sends queries to a database that is updated in real time or every `x` hours, the information fetched by the OCSP is more recent (`thisUpdate` field) than the information contained in the CRL, given that the CRL is built from that database. In the worst case, the OCSP uses the data contained in the CRL and they both have the same thisUpdate field. The information fetched by an OCSP will never be older than the one obtained from a CRL.
. The certificate that signed the OCSP response might contain an `OCSPNoCheck` extension. This extension indicates that the revocation data of the certificate that contains the public key linked to the private key that was used to sign the OCSP response does not need to be checked.
. Getting a response takes less time and less memory space for OCSP than with CRLs. A CRL can take a lot of space and a long time to be downloaded due its big size. There is also no obligation to sort CRLs according to serial number which means that the whole list needs to be browsed until finding the searched serial number.

[[RevocationFallback]]
==== Revocation fallback

Since version `5.11`, DSS performs a validation of revocation data obtained from online sources (on signature extension and validation included) through <<RevocationDataVerifier>>. Revocation data loading strategy runs the revocation verification process for each obtained revocation token (i.e. OCSP or CRL) until receiving the first successful result. In case none of the fetched revocation tokens are good to continue the validation process (i.e. verification has failed), then the strategy decides whether any results must be returned based on the "revocation fallback" property. The revocation fallback has two possible values:

 * `FALSE` (by default) - does not return any revocation token in case none of the obtained revocation tokens have passed the verification process; and
 * `TRUE` - returns the first obtained revocation token when verification of all tokens has failed.

NOTE: While the revocation fallback is set to `FALSE` by default, it is enforced to `TRUE` value within a `SignedDocumentValidator` class for performing a signature validation, in order to produce a complete validation report. Therefore, the change of the value within `CertificateVerifier` will only impact the signature extension process.

To configure the revocation fallback behavior, the property should be configured within `CertificateVerifier`, see section <<certificateVerifier>> for an example.

[[RevocationDataVerifier]]
=== Revocation data verifier

Since version `5.11`, DSS provides a way to configure a revocation data checking algorithm within `SignatureValidationContext` in order to define whether the available revocation data is good and sufficient and if a new revocation data should be loaded, as well as the acceptance of a freshly fetched revocation data itself.

`RevocationDataVerifier` must be provided within the used `CertificateVerifier` in order to configure the revocation data checking behaviour. See section <<certificateVerifier>> for an example of how to provide a custom `RevocationDataVerifier` to a `CertificateVerifier`.

WARNING: An instance of `RevocationDataVerifier` should not be shared between multiple `CertificateVerifier` instances, as it re-uses the same trusted certificate stores defined within a `CertificateVerifier`.

An example of `RevocationDataVerifier` please see below:

[source,java,indent=0]
.RevocationDataVerifier usage
----
include::{sourcetestdir}/eu/europa/esig/dss/cookbook/example/snippets/CertificateVerifierSnippet.java[tags=rev-data-verifier]
----

[[TimestampTokenVerifier]]
=== Timestamp token verifier

Since version `6.1`, DSS provides a way to configure the process for accepting of embedded timestamps in order to extract the corresponding POEs during the validation process.

`TimestampTokenVerifier` must be provided within the used `CertificateVerifier` in order to configure the revocation data checking behaviour. See section <<certificateVerifier>> for an example of how to provide a custom `TimestampTokenVerifier` to a `CertificateVerifier`.

An example of `TimestampTokenVerifier` configuration please see below:

[source,java,indent=0]
.TimestampTokenVerifier usage
----
include::{sourcetestdir}/eu/europa/esig/dss/cookbook/example/snippets/CertificateVerifierSnippet.java[tags=tst-token-verifier]
----
